Let us now turn to the problem of finding
Common Subwords and Subsequences between two
sequences.
So, the first problem we look is what is called
the longest common subword problem. So, let
us suppose we are given two words for the
moment, let us just assume they are words
in English or a language like that, we given
two strings and we want to find the length
of the longest common subword between them.
In a subword, it is just a segment, so for
instance, if I have secret and secretary and
the longest common subword is just the prefix
secret and it has length 6, between bisect
and trisect, I have this common segment isect.
If I bisect and secret on the other hand,
then the common subword is of length 3, namely
sec and if I have director and secretary,
then there are actually only two length subwords
and there are two of them, so ec occurs in
both of them and so does re. So, we may have
more than one candidate for the longest common
subword, but our main pure goal at the moment
is to compute not the subword itself, but
the length, we will see how we can recover
this subword quit easily from the length calculation.
So, the focus at the moment is to get the
length of the subword.
So, let us look at this thing more formally,
so we have two words a 0 to a m and b 0 to
b n, and now what we want to say is that if
I write out a 0, a 1, then have a position
a i, a i+1 and so on, then a m. So, if I can
find some segments starting with a i and b
j, such that if I start from here and I read
off k letters, then start from b j and I read
off k letters. So, I read a i a i plus 1 up
to k minus 1, i plus k minus 1 and b j, b
j plus 1 and b j plus k minus 1.
Then these are both are k line segment which
are equal, then I will say that u and v have
a common subword of length k. So, there must
be a matching sub segment of the word and
now, the aim is to find the length of the
longest such segment. So, the longest common
subword of u and w.
So, here is a Brute force algorithm, you just
try out every position, you look at every
a i and b j, so you look at every i and j,
i between 0 and m and j between 0 and n. And
then I just keep looking, I look at them,
if these two match, I look at the next letter
and go on and I keep going until I find two
positions which do not match. Then I know
that the longest subword starting from these
two positions is only mismatch, so I match
a b i a plus 1 b i plus 1 as for as possible
may keep track of the longest such match,
I do this for every a i and b j.
So, if m is greater than n, then first of
all the number of choices of a i and b j is
m times n and in general, I will go to the
length of the end of the shorter word matching
everything. So, I could do order n work before
I reach the end of this scan, everything matches
until the end of the shorter word, then I
could do order n word. So, therefore, this
will be O of m times n into n or O m n square.
So, now, our goal is to see, whether we can
make this more efficient by doing something
inductive on this.
So, the first observation in the inductive
observation is that if I have a i a i plus
1, if I have b j b j plus 1. So, if I have
a subword starting from here of length k,
then look at the next position and go forward,
this must be a subword of length k minus 1.
So, there is a common subword of length k
at i j, if and only if there is a long common
subword of length k minus 1 and i plus 1 and
j plus 1.
So, in other words I look at i j, if i j is
equal, then there is possible to start a word
at common subword at a i and b j. So, if a
i is equal to b j, I look at the longest common
subword I could have bought i plus 1 and j
plus 1 and add 1 to it. On the other hand,
if a i is not equal to b j, then I cannot
have a common subword adding to it, because
the very first letter does not match. So,
then I just the length of the longest common
subword starting at that position 0. So, this
gives us a handle on the inductive structure.
So, I look at two positions, if there not
equal, I declare that there is no common subwords
starting there, if they are equal, then I
postpone the problem to the next position
and add 1 to whatever I get in next position.
In the boundary condition is when one of the
words is empty, then we have no let us left,
so we cannot extend one of the words any more,
we cannot go forward, then we can say that
there cannot be a common subword, because
there are no letters to use from one of the
common subwords.
So, for convenience, although our words go
from a 0 to a m and from b 0 to b m, we will
allow a m plus oneth position and an n plus
oneth position. So, we will have positions
0 to m plus 1 in u and 0 to n plus 1 in v,
so m plus 1 means I have gone beyond the last
position in u and exhausted all the letters.
Likewise n plus 1 in b means we have reach
the end of the word in v.
So, what we said is that if we have reach
the end of the word in u, then no matter where
we are in v, there is no commons of word,
so length of the common subword is 0. Likewise,
if we have reach the end of the word in v,
wherever we are in u, there is no common subword
length is 0. So, if we are not in these two
cases, we are not in the end of the word,
then we check whether a i equal to b j, if
a i is not equal to b j, we declare as we
saw earlier with longest common subword has
length 0. Otherwise, we inductively compute
the value of in next position in the both
of words and add 1 to it, because we can extend
that word by 1, because a i is equal to b
j.
So, we could write a memorized recursive function
for that, but we will directly try to compute
a dynamic programming solution for this problem.
So, we will typically have these subproblems
of the form LCW, i j; these are the basic
sub problem. So, what we saw from the earlier
thing is that if I have a i equal to b j,
I need to look at a i plus 1, b j plus 1,
so LC, IW, LCW i j depends on LCW i plus 1,
j plus 1. We are this kind of the subproblem
dependency, at every point a value needs to
look to the one which is below.
So, we have in this to be clear this is our
i and this is our j, so it has to look down
and write. So, therefore with our convention
that we draw the arrows backwards that is,
if this square depends on this square, then
we draw an arrow, indicating the dependency
in reverse. So, I need to compute the bottom
of the arrow, before I get to that down arrow,
that is what the arrow, I need to compute
this, before I can compute this. So, now,
we can start at this corner, because this
depends on nothing and then start working.
So, as we saw at the boundary, where I have
exhausted one word, where either the first
word or the second word is. So, we have return
the word by the way, bisect and secret this
2, tell us what the values of a i and b j.
So, these are the values of a I and these
are the values of b j, so these are my two
words. So, initially at the boundary every
longest common subword is 0, because one of
the two words is empty and now, I can do it
say row by row or column by column. So, let
us do it by column for a change.
So, now, at this point we had that a 5 is
equal to b 5, therefore we get 1 plus LCW
of 6, 6 and therefore we get a 1, everywhere
else c and t, e and t, then are no other t.
So, everywhere else, it is just 0, because
the values do not match. So, if I go to the
previous or column now. Here, the only one
that has anything to say is e and e, but there
because the next one is 0. So, I get 1 plus
0 is 1.
If I go to the previous one, in fact the value
no, there is no r in bisect, so therefore,
all the values in the subword is 0, if I come
to the next thing, again now I have one place
where c and c match. So, I say that the longest
common subword starting here is 1 plus whatever
happens that t and r, but t and r do not match
with 1 plus 0 and so on, but now because this
c is now preceded by an e.
So, at this e, I find that it is 1 plus whatever
happens to the bottom, so it 1 plus 1 is 2
and likewise at s, I find that s and s match
and it is 1 plus whatever is bottom right
is becomes 3. So, we identify this way, we
put an entry 3. So, in this particular table,
it is a bit mysterious, where the answer is.
So, what we have to do is find the entry with
the largest value, in this case ma 0, this
is our largest value. So, this tells us that
between these two words, the longest common
subword has length 3. As I said before, we
are only computing the longest common subword,
so how do we actually find the subword. Well,
we can actually in this case, very easily
read it off, we know that there is a longest
common subword here of length 3; that means,
that it must be succeeded by the word length
2 and so on.
So, this particular diagonal tells us what
the letters in the word are and if I just
project this diagonal on to both the one column,
I get the word in c, c. So, in this example
as we see, once we computed the length, it
is very easy to read off this solution.
So, here is some code for this particular
algorithm, the dynamic programming version,
just to make it less confusing, I have explicitly
used the variables r and c, instead of i and
j. So, r is the row, it was this way and c
goes this way. So, what we say is that initially
if I am looking at the last column, these
are all 0’s and you’re looking at the
bottom row, remember that the numbering is
from 0 to n plus 1 and from 0 to m plus 1.
So, we looking the bottom row, when the row
number is n plus 1, every column is 0. So,
this puts the 0’s. So, these two lines just
populate things, now we have to find, remember
the goal is to find the maximum position in
the entire array in order to give the answer
finally, so we just keep track of that with
the value here. So, we initially assume that
the maximum common subword of length 0.
Now, what we do is, we just go column by column
and row by row, so we go to each column from
n to 0, so we do column by column and each
column, we go row by row from bottom to top,
m to 0. We look at the word position r and
position c is u, r equal to b, c. If so I
add 1, should be LCW, so if I have u a bar
is equal to d of c, then the longest common
word, length of the longest common subword
r c 1 plus add r plus 1 c plus 1.
Otherwise, if 0, because there is no common
word and if the new value of computed is bigger
than the value as seen so far, then I will
update it to the current value and finally,
the end this returns length. So, this is a
very straight forward iterative way to process
this thing column by column, you could invert
these two indices and it row by row, so that
is an exercise.
So, we have seen earlier that if we just look
blindly at every position and try to scan
the word starting that position, we get something
which is an order m, n square. now, this solution
when require as to fill in the table of size
m time n, so obviously, every entries in the
m times n table, we just have to look at a
neighbors to fill it up. So, it is a constant
time operation. So, m times n entries, we
fill it m times n times. So, we have an order
n 1, m n. If use dynamic programming, we have
done it, but if use memoization also, you
will get the same answer, all though remember,
there is a recursive calls might cost you
and terms of actual implementation time.
So, we can now look at a slightly more general
problem than longest common subword in one
which is more interesting computationally.
So, what if we do not look for an exact match,
but we allow ourselves to drop some letters.
So, we have a subsequence not a sub word,
it is allows us to drop some letters and now,
if you want to know, after dropping some letters,
what is the longest match we can find.
So, now, our earlier example, some of them
are the same, like in this case without dropping
any letter I can could get 6, I cannot improve
it, same we will bisect, I cannot improve
it. But, now if I look at bisect and secret,
earlier we only had a length 3 match sec,
sec, but now I can extend this match to length
4, because here if we add it t, here I can
drop two letters and get a t. So, I can actually
get a match which is length 4, likewise in
these two director and secretary, earlier
we had re, re and we had ec, ec.
But, now by doing this topic I can get ectr,
like get ectr, similarly I can get retr, I
can get retr. So, if we allow ourselves to
drop letters we can get longer sequences that
match and this is called longest common subsequence.
So, one we have thinking about it in terms
of our earlier longest common subword is that
I can now, if I match the certain segment,
I can continue to match to the right. So,
I can let both the indices go forward. So,
I can go down and right in the grid and look
for in other place where there is a match.
So, earlier we had a three level match between
a sec, and then we add a one level match between
d. So, I can combine these two like a four
level longest common subsequence, but we will
do the subsequence calculation in a much more
direct way there itself.
So, before we proceed it useful to look at
why the longest common subsequence problem
is interesting. So, one of the area is an
bio informatics. So, biologists are interested
in identifying, how close two species are
each other in the genetic sense. So, if we
look at our DNA, our DNA is basically a long
string over an alphabet of size 4. So, these
are 4 proteins, it forms our DNA, they are
abbreviated as A, T, G, C. So, now, if we
look at two strings of DNA and natural way
to compare, how close they are each other
is to ask how much, how well they aligned
features drop of few things here and there.
So, it could be one species other few extra
genes and other species as a few extra gene
something else and if drop those genes, then
everything else the same, but these genes
may occur, it different places in two species.
So, it is not that there is a common part,
and then there is an extra part, it rather
than the new genes are interspersed among
the other genes.
So, we need to know, if we can drop of few
genes in one and few genes in another can
be over lap. So, that is the longest common
subsequence problem, if you use UNIX or LINUX
are any related operating system, there is
a command code DIFF, which allows you to check
with the two text files are the same or find
the minimal difference between them.
So, the DIFF command also does longest common
subsequence, it treats each line as a character
and it says, what is the minimum number of
lines, I can drop between these two files,
4 I can match them, and then it tells you
how to insert things back. But, basically
it is doing the longest common subsequence
calculation to tell you, how close two text
files are to each other. So, there are plenty
of applications for this longest common subsequence
problem.
So, let us try understanding inductive structure
of this longest common subsequence problem
directly, not throw the longest common subword.
So, the first thing to note is that if I am
looking for this longest common subword between
these two, supposing I find that a 0, is in
fact equal to b 0. Now, I claim that, I should
combine them in the solution, and then look
for a solution in the rest.
So, I should do something, where I say that
there is one match a 0 equal to b 0, and then
I must find the list. So, this requires a
little of bit of an argument, because it could
be that this is not the optimum way to do
it. So, remember this is the bit like a greedy
thing; we are saying that, because a 0 equal
to b 0 match it up, and then proceed.
So, one might argue that, this is not the
way, I want to go, supposing a 0, in fact,
should be match to b 2, that would be the
best solution. So, it is not good idea match
a 0 to be b 0, but now notice that if a 0
is match to b 2, because it is the subsequence,
then anything to the write, say a 1 is match
to something it must be further to the right,
these lines, I cannot have anything which
process like this, I cannot any match with
process.
Because, they must occur in the same sequence,
so if a 0 match to b 2, a 1 something match
into the right, a 2 must match something still
for the right and so on. So, all these matches
go from bottom from the top word to the bottom
word without processing each other. So, now,
if I take this solution and I know the a 0
and b 0, then I can actually move this arrow
here and make it match like this and remove
this, what will this do, it disturb the original
solution by no long using a 0 match a b 2,
but, a 0 match to b 0.
But, in terms of the quality of the solution,
the number of matches is the same, earlier
a 0 matches somewhere else, now it match to
b 0, the length of the longest common subsequence
does not change. So, turning the arguments
backward, it says that therefore if a 0 equal
to b 0, it is very safe to assume that a 0,
b 0 forms part the solution and proceed to
the rest of the problem. So, we can look at
the subproblem from a 1 and b 1. So, this
is the first case, the first case says, that
we can look at if a 0 equal to b 0, we can
look at this subproblem a 1 to b 1.
Now, if it is not equal, then one is not sure
what to do, it is not a sound idea a to drop
both. So, for instant supposing I have something
like straw and astray, then just because the
S does not match the a, does not mean that
I should in both of them, I should keep that
S alive to match with next S. So, both cannot
be there, because they do not equal each other
and S match it something on the right and
a cannot match as something for it.
If they are both different, if they are not
equal, then this must match something there
and this must match something here and both
cannot happen. because, they will cross, this
we said not allowed, so only one of them can
match something to the right on the other
word, but we do not know which one. So, this
is what the general principle of these inductive
solutions is that you do not write to choose
one or the other.
So, if I leave b 0 and I drop a 0, then I
get a solution, I get a subproblem which has
a 1 to a m and b 0 to b m. If on the other
hand, I keep a 0 and a drop b 0, then a 0
to a m remains, but knows b 1 to b n, these
are my two possible subproblems knowing that
both a 0 and b 0 cannot be there. But, I should
allow one of them to be there, otherwise I
made how sub optimize solution.
So, dropping one of them, it is like in a
job scheduling case, where you say that, if
this job with this something else is not there,
if a 0 is there, b 0 is not there, b 0 is
there, a 0 is not there, but beyond that you
cannot say. So, therefore, I solve both of
these problems in principle and take their
maximum, the better of them.
So, this is the inductive structure, either
the first letter matches in which case I include,
it in my sequences and solve the remaining
subproblem. Or, the first letter does not
match in which case is generate two subproblems,
one by propping each of the letters in term
and I take the maximum of the true.
So, as usual let LCS i comma j, stand for
the LCS of the problem starting at a i and
b j. So, if a i equal b j as we say, LCS of
i j is 1 plus LCS of i plus 1 j plus 1, this
says, we will assume that a i equal to b j
is included not solution. And then proceed
with the rest of the input, if it is not,
then I have to drop one of them. So, either
I will look at LCS i plus 1 comma j or LCS
i j plus 1, I will look at both and then I
take the maximum of these two and there is
no other thing, because the current word not
does not match.
So, as with the longest common subword problem,
we will extend that position is to beyond
the word to indicate the word is over. So,
we will go from 0 to m plus 1 and 0 to n plus
1 and when, we have reached m plus 1 or n
plus 1, then the LCS problem will give a 0,
because they cannot be a common subsequence,
since one of the words going to be empty.
So, the subproblem dependency in LCS is a
little more complicated than in LCW, LCW we
only had these dependency, that is we said
that, i j depended i plus 1 j plus 1. But,
now we are also dependency i plus 1 j and
i j plus 1. So, we have a dependency coming
to the right and from the low as well. So,
we have a three way dependency as we saw all
these values are going to be 0 here. So, this
is the first non trivial value that we can
compute, because all its three neighbors are
nowhere else are around.
So, if I look at here for example, the bottom
neighbors not, if I look here the neighbors
not. So, LCS m comma n, 5 comma 5 in this
case, the value is available to compute, because
everything around it the three dependent squares
around it are all populated. So, I can do
that and then I can again I do row by row.
Once I got this, I can do this, I will have
all three values, once I do this, I can go
right or I can go left, I can do this and
so on, I can do diagonally, so let us do it
column by column.
So, we start with the base case, where the
LCS at the boundary is 0, because you cannot
have a longest common subsequence with an
empty word. Then, we fill up the first column
and here we get a 1, because when the two
match, we have 1 plus LCS of, i plus 1, j
plus 1. Now, we have from differences, so
when it does not match like when c, so if
I look at c that e they do not match, then
what I am suppose to do, I am suppose to take
the maximum of these two.
So, this is the maximum of these 2, I get
to 1, now since I take the maximum of these
2, I get to 1, maximum of these 2, I get to
1 and so on. So, the longest common subword
problem, it say if the current let it does
not match, then I get a 0, here its not there,
because I am allowed to drop this set and
go head. So, therefore, this one proper get
along this one.
Similarly, the one property to get this along
the previous column, because nothing is an
r. now, some get an additions, when I reach
c and c, it is 1 plus i plus 1 j plus 1. So,
we get it 2. Likewise, when I go to the next
column, when I reach e and e, it is 1 plus
i plus 1 j plus 1, so I get the 3. And finally,
when I reach this S and S, I get this 4 and
now, this 4 propagates, because here I take
the max of these 2.
So, I get this 4 max of these 2, I get 4.
So, in this particular case actually LCS of
0 comma 0 is my answer, remember in LCW I
had to look around the in the whole grid to
find out, we are the maximum was in LCS, you
do not want to do that. The value you get
0 comma 0 is acts with answer you are looking
for...
And now as before you can trace back the path,
why was each value filled, was it filled,
because it to 1 plus i plus 1, j plus 1 or
it goes to fill, because max with other two
networks, if so which was the match. So, which
was very clear this 4 came, because it was
a max, because S is not equal to b. So, it
came from below and this 4 also came from
below S is equal to S.
So, this is came from here and so on, so you
can trace out this value and everywhere where
you have this diagonal, it was there, because
the value is matched. So, there are value
is 4 and there is exactly four diagonal steps,
this one, this one, this one. And then one
at the bottom right, these are the four matches
which constitute the longest common subsequence
and you can read it of that the thing and
this is forms the sequence sect.
So, as we say before provided you can compute
the answer numerically, you can go back and
retrace that computation and figure out the
witness and it is called and which word actually
which subsequence actually gives has to be
sanction.
So, the code for the LCS is little bit simpler
then for LCW, because we do not have to keep
track of these maximum value and where it
occurs, because we only need to find the value
at 0 c. So, as before we use r and c to be
little clearer that rows go this way and columns
go this way. So, column is go from 0 to n
plus 1 and rows go from 0 to m plus 1.
So, we initialize the boundary to be 0, and
then we do column by column row by row from
bottom to top, if the two are equal, then
you add 1 plus the value of bottom. If the
two are not equal, I take the maximum of these
two values and finally, when this values are
filled out, I have written the value, it is
0 comma 0.
So, this is similar to LCW, we basically fill
out in m, n size table each entry in the table
is easy to compute takes only constant among
look at the three neighbors. And therefore,
overall using dynamic programming, we have
demonstrated an order m n algorithm, we can
also use memoization at the cost of recursion.